>> Anjana Vakil: Functional programming
boils down to this one idea,
pure functions, so when I say a pure
function, what am I talking about?
A pure function, one way to think
about it is something that like all
functions that we're used to writing,
it takes inputs and it returns output.
The difference between a regular function
option of the kind that we're used to
working with every day in JavaScript and
a pure function.
Is that in a pure function,
all that this function looks at in order
to decide what its computation is gonna
be, are the inputs that it receives.
So it only takes its inputs in,
it doesn't take in any other information
about the state of the world,
the weather today, the time it is,
etc, only its input arguments.
And then all that it does is do
whatever computation it needs to do and
return its output.
That is, it doesn't do anything else,
and we'll talk about what I need,
anything else might be in a moment.
So a pure function is
essentially a transformation
from inputs to outputs, period, done.
So when we think about functions in
JavaScript, we usually think about
all kinds of other stuff that we can do,
like talk to the browser, or
make Fetch requests or
write something to files or what have you.
Essentially talk to the rest of
the world from within the function.
In functional programming,
that is not allowed.
All the function looks at is its inputs,
and
all that it does is give it an output,
and that's it.
It doesn't look at any of the rest of the
world, and it doesn't have any effect on
the rest of the world,
its only effect is its return value.
So for example, we have a very
simple function here called greet,
where we just have one line and
it's a console log.
So can anybody help me break down what is
not pure about this Greek
function on the left side, yeah.
>> Speaker 2: Well, it's using name
that is not coming in as an argument,
it's just using it from the higher scope.
>> Anjana Vakil: Exactly, so one thing
that it's doing is it's looking at data in
the outside world, like in this case,
the value of the variable name,
that is not part of its inputs.
So that's not allowed, great.
What about anything else?
Yeah?
>> Speaker 3: It's logging to the console,
which is not a pure output.
>> Anjana Vakil: Yes, exactly,
logging to the console is not the same as,
is returning a value,
what does this function return?
>> Speaker 4: Void.
>> Anjana Vakil: Yeah, undefined, right?.
It doesn't have a explicit return,
and in JavaScript,
that means it returns undefined.
So if it's not returning its output value,
and it's a pure,
if it's not returning an output value,
it definitely can't be a pure function,
because it's doing something else, right.
And that means that if something changes
for example, the value of that name,
and I run the function again with
the exact same inputs, in this case,
no inputs, I might get a different value.
It also means that I don't know the side
effect of vlogging to the console that
might work differently in different
situations, different environments.
And so we might get a different
side effect different
times that I run this function.
Now, a pure way of structuring this would
be to make name an input to the function,
so that way, we're only looking at that
data in order to make our computation.
And then to return the output instead
of logging it to the console.
So this is a very, very simple,
but I hope illustrative example of
what we want to not do [LAUGH]
In our functional programs.